>> At one point, my husband
says, you know, doctor,
take her kidney.
Since the kidney is completely
covered and it's not
functioning, take her kidney .
And the doctor said no,
and nobody in this hospital
will do it.
She's terminal.
She has a few months to live.
Why put her through that
kind of an operation?
>> And I was feeling
a little better.
And I figured, OK, that's great.
I'm done with this thing.
Well, as soon as I got
off of the antibiotics,
this thing started
to come back again.
>> I had a woman I worked
for for 15 years at the time.
She came and she said, Doris,
she's not going to make it.
She told my mother,
she's going to die.
>> I went to a top oncologist;
breast oncologist in Sloan
Kettering, and he said
that he put his 40--
I remember him saying to me,
I put my 40 years' experience
on the line here.
If you don't do this
chemotherapy regiment
that I recommend, your
chance of survival is 15.
If you do it, it's 65
or something like this.
>> They wanted to do chemo
just to make sure that there
wasn't any cancer
in my lymph system.
I agreed to one treatment,
and it made me so sick,
I told the doctor, I said, I
will not continue at this time.
And it was during
that point in time
that I was introduced
to the Foundation
for Advancement
of Cancer Therapy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In a world under assault
from pollutants that bombard
our environment, and chemicals
that contaminate our food
and water, cancer
is on the rise.
Over 10 million Americans
are already afflicted.
1 and 1/2 million new cases are
expected to develop this year.
And despite the
increasing effectiveness
of chemotherapy and radiation
to affect remissions and prolong
life, one in two men
and one in three women
will eventually develop
or die from the disease.
Over 500,000 people
in the United States
alone will die from
cancer this year.
Because of this grim prognosis
and because the toxic nature
of conventional therapies
destroys healthy cells, even
as it kills malignant
ones, an increasing number
of doctors and patients
are now exploring
safe, established
biological alternatives
as a cure for cancer
and other diseases.
One of the foremost
organizations promoting
a biological approach
to cancer treatment
has been FACT, the
Foundation for Advancement
in Cancer Therapy.
For almost 40 years, until
her death at the age of 93,
its president, Ruth Sackman,
had been raising the awareness
of physicians and
patients about fighting
cancer and other diseases
by natural means.
Her work, however,
continues to be
carried on by a
number of physicians
and other medical
professionals who
share her approach to preventing
and combating disease.
Among them is Dr. Philip Incao.
>> My name is Dr. Philip Incao.
I've been a physician
for over 40 years.
And for most of
those years, I've
practiced a form of
integrative medicine called
anthroposophic medicine.
I first met Ruth Sackman, the
founder and director of FACT,
in 1981, when my wife
and I consulted Ruth
about my wife's breast cancer.
Ruth helped my wife very much.
And after that, Ruth and
I became good friends
and coworkers until Ruth's
recent death at the age of 93.
Ruth firmly believed,
as I do, that we all
have the potential to
heal ourselves of cancer
and other serious illnesses.
For over 35 years, Ruth
helped more than 1,000 people
with cancer who chose a safe,
nutritional, restorative
treatment instead of relying
solely on conventional cancer
therapy.
In this program, you
will meet five people
who sought guidance from FACT.
Four of them were
diagnosed with cancer.
One was diagnosed
with Lyme disease.
And all of them
have been disease
free for no less than 13
years, and in some cases,
for more than 30 years.
All are well-documented
cases and are
representative of a large pool
of long-term recovered patients
assisted by FACT.
At the conclusion
of these interviews,
I will have a conversation
with Dr. Sheryl
Leventhal about the
significance of these cases.
Dr. Leventhal is a
former oncologist
and is currently a practitioner
of functional medicine.
>> In November of '93, I was
going for my yearly checkup.
That was a thing to do.
I was very healthy,
but the checkup
had to be done every year.
And my doctor had an x-ray
machine in his office,
and he would x-ray the chest.
And he called me
home and he said,
you know, Rita, I see a
little pin spot on your lung.
It wasn't there a year ago.
I need you to go to
a radiologist who
is more professional.
So it took a week or two,
and I went to a radiologist,
and he called the
doctor and he says,
yeah, I see that
little pin spot.
But you know what, we
don't know what it is.
Have her come back
in three months.
And the doctor said,
no, if it's there today
and it wasn't there yesterday,
I'm not waiting three months.
He called me and he directed
me to a, for C-T, a body scan.
And that was on the
17th of November, '93.
And we came home, and 4:00,
I got a call from the doctor,
and his statement is,
Rita, you have cancer.
And I say, where?
And he says all over.
I said, what do
you mean, all over?
He says in the kidney, in
the liver, in the lungs.
You need to go to
see oncologist.
And he got me an appointment
in Sloan Kettering.
They immediately said that
it's renal cell carcinoma
with metastasis to the lung.
In plain language, it's
kidney cancer and spread
into the lungs.
Every time we went there, he
underlined, you are terminal.
You are terminal.
At one point my
husband says, you
know, doctor, take her kidney.
Since the kidney is
completely covered
and it's not functioning,
take her kidney.
And the doctor said no,
and nobody in this hospital
will do it.
She's terminal.
She has a few months to live.
Why put her through that
kind of an operation?
At the same time, my
husband spoke to his cousin
in Florida who is a kidney
specialist for children.
And he requested
all the information.
We sent him the slice from
the biopsy and the tests,
and he called, he says,
you come right down here.
You're a walking bomb.
That kidney has to come out.
When I arrived in Florida,
it was the end of December.
I received a phone call from
a friend who said, Rita,
I would like to
come with my son.
I have met her son once
before, and he looked peculiar.
And it was explained to
me that he's a vegetarian,
so I thought vegetarians
looked peculiar.
But I agreed, and I prepared
oranges, I made a salad.
I made sure that the man had
something vegetarian to eat.
And he explained to me that
he's a cancer survivor.
He is a member of
FACT organization.
He spoke about Ruth Sackman.
And he said, you know,
Rita, you don't have to die.
You don't even have to be sick.
You just have to
change lifestyle.
And he took a yellow pad, and
he drew a line in the middle,
and he said, as of
this minute, you have
to stop eating meat, chicken.
You have to stop drinking
milk, eating cheese.
You cannot open cans.
A very, very long list.
On the right side he wrote
organic egg, organic vegetable,
organic fruit.
A little soup.
And Rita, you need to detoxify.
You'll be OK.
And I looked at him.
And I said, no wonder
he looks peculiarly.
He's crazy.
If I follow his direction, I
am not going to die of cancer.
I will probably die of hunger.
And I really ignored
what he said.
He left.
And about three or four
days after he left,
I got a call from the
hospital that they
have to postpone the operation
because I am extremely anemic,
and they have to build
me up with iron pills.
So I called Daniel,
and I told him,
he says, under no circumstances
are you to take iron pills.
If you're anemic, I need you to
drink organic beets, carrots,
organic spinach and carrots,
two or three times a day.
After two weeks, I went back to
the hospital for a blood test,
and the nurse came out, and
she says, Rita, I'm so sorry.
In the lab, they mixed up
your blood with somebody else.
I have to do it again.
Go.
Do it.
She comes out after 10 minutes.
She says, you know what, we
don't know what's going on.
You're not anemic, and
you have enough blood
to donate towards
your operation.
They checked it again,
they spoke to the doctor,
and I'm not anemic.
So they rescheduled
it for March 9.
And as we're driving home,
I said to my husband,
you know, all my
life, I was anemic.
And everything the doctors
did, nothing helped.
For two weeks I'm drinking
the juice, and I'm not anemic.
There is something to
this kind of approach.
The doctor who was
preparing to operate on me
took me to an
oncologist, because he
was practicing something
new called immunotherapy.
And a month and a half after
the operation, I went back
to the doctor, and he did
a chest x-ray, and he says,
you know what?
I like your approach.
Let's wait with
the immunotherapy.
You continue doing
what you're doing,
and I'm going to watch you.
The only reason he didn't
push for immunotherapy
is after my lifestyle,
he saw less nodules.
At one point, he saw 12.
At another point, he saw them a
little weaker, not as obvious.
And little by little, at
one point he says, you know,
I see only nine.
He says, let's continue doing
what you're doing, Rita.
It looks good.
And I was doing my stuff
and he was checking on me,
and every time I came,
he says, it looks good.
It looks good.
So I never had immunotherapy.
I never had chemotherapy
or radiation.
And I worked with Daniel
for about a year and a half
almost daily.
He would call me, he would
stay with me on the phone.
He would teach me how
to get away from stress.
He would fill in some parts
about what I should eat.
And I became a fanatic.
I eat only organic.
I cook my own meals.
I drink juices.
I drink only distilled
water that I make, my own.
And finally Daniel
said, that's it, Rita.
I have taught you
whatever I could.
You must call Ruth.
And at that point, I
called Ruth Sackman.
And I think the day I
called her, I was born.
She has taught me what
life is all about.
I mean, healthy life.
She taught me it's
OK to feel sick,
because it doesn't
mean you're sick.
Our body is in a detoxification
state many, many times.
And when you detoxify,
it could be a headache,
it could be throwing up,
it could be diarrhea,
it could be stomachache,
it could be blood in urine,
it could be anything.
Do not get scared.
Do not run to a doctor.
Give yourself a few days.
Ruth gave me a list of
juices, and my husband
would do the juice.
Then I would have a
fresh vegetable soup
from organic vegetable
that my husband cooked.
I would have a lot of salad.
And my main meal
was organic fruit.
I would eat every fruit
that was in season.
And as weak as I was,
I was exercising.
I think being with Ruth,
seeing what happened to me,
and seeing that everything
she said is true,
I became a self-reliant
person, and I
don't let doctors twist my arm.
And 13 years later, I'm here,
even though the doctors gave me
only two months to live.
>> When I was young,
in fifth grade,
I had a problem
with my right elbow.
Many years later, I had
a similar, I would say,
identical problem
in my left wrist,
where my left wrist
swelled up pretty much
to the size of a tennis ball.
And finally at age 28,
it got very severe.
It was in 1978,
almost 30 years ago.
And it was cancer.
It was not only in my bone, but
it was also in my lymph system.
They scheduled a series
of radiation treatments
just to the wrist.
And then after we finished
that course of treatment,
they wanted to do chemo just
to make sure that there wasn't
any cancer in my lymph system.
I agreed to one treatment,
and it made me so sick,
I told the doctor, I said, I
will not continue at this time.
And it was during
that point in time
that I was introduced
to the Foundation
for Advancement
of Cancer Therapy.
And I started
interviewing people.
And my preference was people
who had a long-term survival
rate, because I figured
those are the people who've
been there, done that.
And I grabbed everybody I could,
and it was very intensive.
So it left me with a great
deal of hope and confidence,
because when you talk to people
who've been there and done it,
and have been around for
seven, eight, 10 years to talk
about it, and some
of these people
were deathly ill, much
worse off than I was,
I placed a lot of
emphasis on that.
I don't want the guy who got
over cancer last year and gee,
I'm feeling great.
And say, oh, great,
I'll go do what he did.
Well, I have too
many good friends
who have died after being told
that they were 100% cured.
So when I went
back to my doctor,
that was the point at which
I had already half made
up my mind, but I was still kind
of scared to leave the experts
behind.
I'll use that in quotes.
And so I gave him an
hour and a half exam.
I had three pages of
questions, and I have to say,
he was very kind,
gave me a lot of time.
Answered all my questions
as fully as he could.
And at the end of the interview,
I was not overly impressed.
I was impressed with him as
a man and his intelligence
and his training, but I wasn't
impressed with his results.
And it was at that
point in time I told him
I had decided I was going
to go another route,
and he asked what it was.
And I told him that I was going
to follow the Foundation's
recommendations,
and he got furious
with me, at which point in
time he lost his temper.
He felt I was going
down a quack route.
I was taking something
that was going to lead me
astray and waste valuable time.
And in the meantime,
cancer would be spreading,
and I'd be dying, and all that.
And it was
interesting, because he
was trying to sell me on his
approach, and he was saying,
you know, I lost my
mother to cancer,
and I lost my sister to cancer,
and I lost my sister-in-law
to cancer.
And don't you think I
would have done everything
in my power to save them?
And I thought, well, yeah, I
would, I said, but you're not
really selling me.
You're not very convincing,
because you know,
he's sitting here telling
me about his failures
with his loved ones.
And I'm thinking, OK.
And I think he had as
good or better a track
record than many oncologists.
So all it did was
cement my resolve.
Once I decided that I was going
to leave orthodox medicine
behind and try the
route that I had learned
about with the Foundation,
the first thing I realized
was that I really could not rely
on the doctor to make me well.
I had to become my own prime
contractor, so to speak.
I was going to
make the decisions.
My first decision, of course,
was to take a different route.
And that's a little
daunting, but it's also,
I think, part of
your healing process,
because I was no longer
relying on someone else
to make me well.
I was going to make me well.
Ruth connected me
with William Kelley,
who had recovered
from pancreatic cancer
many years ago.
And he had a very,
very intensive program
which I went on.
Huge questionnaires,
personal interviews.
And they come up with a
dietary regimen, supplements,
body cleansing,
internal and external.
Very, very thorough program.
And what they try to do is
focus on your metabolic type
to determine what's the
ideal diet for you, what
is your body missing, what
nutrients are you lacking,
what organs are not
functioning properly.
So they come up with a complete
program, both food, liquids,
body cleansing, and
supplementation,
and other aspects as well.
And I got this huge manual
that I had to follow,
and I followed it
extremely religiously.
And when I started the
Kelley program, of course
I had a lot of physical
pain from the cancer,
because I had a very
weak left wrist.
I was overweight.
I was sluggish and had
very little energy.
But after being on the program
for probably three or four
weeks, I actually started
feeling a little worse.
Like I mentioned earlier,
detoxifying dumps stuff.
Your body knows when
it's time, knows
when it's strong enough to
start getting rid of the junk.
And it won't do it until
it's capable of doing so,
or at least that's
been my experience.
When I started getting
these healing crises,
as they call them, where
you're dumping toxicity out
of your cells and into
your eliminative channels,
and you start feeling
sick, of course,
the first thing you think about
is, oh god, what do I have?
Oh, what happened?
I'm getting worse.
Of course I would call
Ruth and say, jeez,
what's going on here?
And she'd say, don't
worry, don't worry.
You're doing just fine.
And of course you do worry at
first, because cancer is scary.
You don't really want to die.
With her guidance still, I kept
a base level of supplements.
A lot of pancreatic
enzymes, a lot
of supplements to help boost
those organs that you really
need to get healthy, your
thymus, your thyroid,
your liver, your pancreas.
As I went through
the program, there
was a test called the human
chorionic gonadotropin
analysis, which
is a simple urine
test that measures the
presence of the hCG
hormone in your system.
Although it's not a direct
measure of cancer activity,
what it does is,
it shows the degree
of cell division
occurring in your body.
As I started to
feel better, I could
see my levels of this
hormone dropping, which
indicates a lower
degree of cell activity.
Well, first off, that's
good emotionally,
because you say, oh, good,
the activity is dropping.
When I first got out of the
hospital, just moving my wrist
that much was excruciating pain.
I couldn't do anything
with my wrist.
And I have never done
anything since that time,
other than the program that
I've been on for years.
And my wrist has grown back.
I'm a classical guitarist.
And it's amazing
that I can still
play classical guitar today.
And that's very strenuous
on your left wrist.
FACT was instrumental
in my recovery.
And Ruth monitors people
over the long haul,
because that's what
she interested--
she's not interested in the
whiz bang cure of today.
She wants the proven,
time-honored effective
technologies, the
things that work.
So biorepair really
is a good term
to describe what we went on.
But you're not using
drugs to biorepair.
You're cleaning out
the junk, you're
putting in the good stuff.
You're giving your body
what it needs to thrive,
and you're giving it
the right environment.
And it's a lifestyle change.
I just know that the body
is remarkably resilient,
and if you just give
it half a chance
and you do the things right,
if you get the bad stuff out
and you put the good stuff
in and you get your attitude
right, and you take
charge, you can do it.
Of course, it's much smarter.
You just stay on a good
program all your life,
I'm sure you're
going to live longer
and you're going
to be healthier,
you're going to be happier.
But hey, there it is.
>> My cancer diagnosis
happened while I was studying
for the master.
Since I was in
infertility treatment,
I was seeing doctors
all the time.
I had just had a
checkup in months
before I touched my breast, and
I feel a pretty large tumor.
And I go back to
my gynecologist,
and he touches it, and oh,
you won't die from this.
This is nothing.
Three months later
or four months later,
I'm seeing my gynecologist
for my infertility testing.
And so he checks me and
said, I don't like this.
And this is an NYU
doctor, and said,
I want you to go get it out,
or at least have a biopsy.
I go get a biopsy,
and this is a concern.
Apparently it's an
aggressive type of cancer.
I remember the date.
The date of the diagnosis was
the 29th of December, 1982.
Because a year
later on that date,
my first daughter was
born, and I thought to me
that was kind of the
triumph of my will,
and I got a confirmation
that yes, this
is going to be life, not death.
I didn't dare do nothing.
So I did have a mastectomy,
and then of course,
they recommended radiation
and chemotherapy,
and I went to a top
oncologist, breast oncologist
in Sloan Kettering.
And he said that he put his 40--
I remember him saying to me,
I put my 40 years' experience
on the line here.
If you don't do this
chemotherapy regiment
that I recommend, your
chance of survival is 15.
If you do it, it's 65
or something like this.
And I said to myself,
I'm not doing it.
The thought that
made me decide is
that spending my last
year feeling horrible,
because I know what
chemotherapy feels
like, that was not the way
I wanted to end my life.
So basically I went
to the alternative.
Not with the idea
that I necessarily
will be successful, but
with the idea that at least
I'll have a choice about how I
live the last part of my life.
A friend kind of
mentioned it to me
that there is this organization
that I could call and get
some information.
It wasn't easy talking
to Ruth in the beginning.
It wasn't easy, either.
It wasn't an immediate--
because Ruth is a warrior.
And she's very harsh.
And this is a time,
a cancer diagnosis
always is a very scary and
very frightening experience.
It's maybe the first
time as a young person,
I think also at any
age, it's the first time
that you kind of
face your mortality,
because we do live as
if we will live forever.
So I figured out then that
Ruth may have very, very
useful information for me.
But she will not be
somebody who will
be very helpful in helping
me with my emotional struggle
here.
And in some ways, I
think her strong opinions
were helpful, too, because
this alternative is
a very demanding alternative.
It's much more demanding
than just going to the doctor
and putting your
arm out and sitting
through a chemotherapy session.
It really requires a
total transformation
of all your habits and
your way of thinking,
and about everything.
It's not only about
food and health,
but it's about life in general.
And the alternative
that Ruth suggested
was that I am becoming the
agent of my life, of my health.
But it takes a lot of work,
it takes a lot of discipline.
The really revolutionary
idea in my mind
is that the body has a
capacity to heal itself,
and that all we
need to do really
is to bring it
into a place where
it can do the healing that
it knows how to do better
than any doctors and any human.
We don't have the
wisdom of the body.
That required
changing diet, meaning
moving towards organic
food as much as I
can, towards raw food
as much as possible,
because you want to get the
life energy that's in the food.
And then the cleansing.
My understanding, that
particular with breast cancer,
the state of the colon
is really crucial
and how clean or
unclean the colon is.
So I started with a very
rigorous cleansing program.
The knowledge that you've
done everything you can,
to me, there was something
very reassuring about it.
And beyond this, now
I can wait calmly.
I don't wait anxiously.
I'm waiting very
calmly, because I
know everything that could
have done have been done.
It's not like esoteric
belief that makes no sense.
I think to me it
make deep sense.
But I'm not trying to--
and at the time, I didn't
talk to anybody else.
I didn't want scientific
proof for anything,
for any of these claims.
It didn't interest me.
It made sense to me.
It just made sense that
this body has this wisdom
to heal itself, and all
I need to do is help it.
And it makes sense, that's all.
What else can I say?
>> A lot of times we
would go out after work.
There was golf
courses fairly nearby.
And we would go out, and
we'd play golf either
on the weekend, and talked
through work situations or what
have you.
I looked down and I had the
red ring, you know the classic,
I guess you would call it a
classic red ring on my arm.
So I said, OK, so I
got bit by something.
And it was at the time
where Lyme disease was not
popularized, if you will, so
not everybody knew about it.
And I'd say over the
course of several weeks,
I started to get a headache,
I started not to feel so well.
Definitely could not sleep well.
Then went to my
family physician,
and he recommended the
standard course of antibiotics.
And I did start to feel better.
I was like, OK, this is great.
I'm starting to sleep.
You know, it wasn't 100%.
Well, as soon as I got
off of the antibiotics,
this thing started
to come back again.
So that my doctor had
recommended that I go
see a specialist over at Yale.
The course of action
that they wanted to take
was using a, what I understood
to be a powerful antibiotic
called Rocephin.
So I started feeling great.
I wouldn't say 100%, but
it was like, oh, my god,
I'm getting some relief.
I'm starting to sleep.
The symptoms were going
away, which was great.
Finished the course
of antibiotics, which
was like, oh, thank goodness.
Two or three weeks later,
symptoms were back again.
Same symptoms just as
powerful, felt just as lousy.
So I went back to the
specialist, and I was like,
can you please help me?
Right, so we know
the antibiotics
appeared to be working.
What can we do to get this
thing wiped out of my system?
The course of action
that we'd like to take
is, we'd like to
double the dose.
We're confident doubling the
dose will wipe this thing out.
Now I'm thinking, OK, let's
see, you were confident
before that the original dose
was going to wipe it out,
but it didn't do it.
But now you're
confident to double
the dose of antibiotics,
which is already
impacting my system anyway.
And I'm thinking, this
just doesn't sound right.
Luckily, at the same
time, a friend of mine
who lived in the city
who I was talking to,
I was going through my whole
scenario of what was going on.
And my friend said, well, I
know of this organization called
FACT.
And you should give them a call.
And Ruth Sackman, you
should contact Ruth Sackman
and just go through what
you're going through.
And I'm thinking, OK, FACT.
And they said, well,
it's an organization that
helps with cancer
treatment and the like.
Like.
I'm thinking, well,
I don't have cancer.
At least, I don't think so.
Is this the right fit?
You don't want to
go to a foot doctor
if you're having a problem with
your elbow or something, right?
I called up Ruth, and
I started a talk her
through what my symptoms were.
And she's very matter
of fact, right?
And I was told this
from my friend.
It was like, you know, Ruth's a
fabulous person, great person,
but she's going to
be matter of fact.
Here's what it is, here's
what I want you to do.
If you would like to try
it, you need to do it.
You can't play
with, hey, I'm going
to do the antibiotics
as well just as a backup
and do this whole thing, right?
Because they're
counterproductive.
They don't work well
together, right?
I had to talk to her
several times to--
and it wasn't to understand.
Ruth was very clear, right?
But it was a matter of getting
an understanding of what is it
that I needed to do,
how would it help me,
and why would I be doing this
when a doctor isn't telling me
this stuff?
And I was trying to
really understand, OK,
so everything makes sense
from what Ruth was saying.
So I said, well, why
wouldn't I do this?
But then I thought, OK,
well, she's not my doctor.
I haven't checked
her credentials.
You know, this is a person that
I'm talking to on the phone
and getting great
suggestions and advice.
But it's like, well,
should I do it?
And it's like, well,
there's no medications.
Well, why wouldn't I do it?
It makes a lot of sense.
Why wouldn't I try it?
So my thought was, great, Ruth,
let's move forward with this.
And that's when I
started to go through,
I'll call it the
treatment with her,
her suggestions of what would
help detoxify my system.
And Ruth was great, talked me
through every step of the way
and really said,
you're going to take
fluids to help make sure you're
not going to get dehydrated.
There's certain combinations
of vitamins, herbs.
And I would take that stuff,
and it was like, amazing.
As I went through the day, I
remember getting reactions.
My body was reacting.
I think my face was
getting exceptionally red,
and I'd call Ruth.
Ruth, Ruth, I'm
getting a reaction.
Should I stop this whole thing?
What's going on?
It's like, no, no,
that's a normal reaction
that people would get.
As you're detoxifying,
you're going to sweat,
because your body is trying
to rid itself of the toxicity.
And actually, what I found,
at the end of the first day,
and as I got into
the second day,
and I think it was around 24
to 48 hours, 80% of my symptoms
had totally left.
And that was the first time
that I felt so great like that,
and my mind was
getting so clear.
And it's like, my
god, this is amazing
that I can feel so great just
from doing this easy fast.
Right, and it's like,
wow, I don't care
what else may come out of this.
I feel fantastic.
So after that point, I
made a conscious effort.
I had gotten a juicer to be
part of this program as well.
So getting into the
healthy, you know,
the carrot juices and the
like, in helping the system
to heal itself.
And I guess that's
one thing I've
learned over time with Ruth is
that hey, your body, if you're
given the right materials,
and right materials being,
hey, the right food,
the right mindset,
and given the right environment,
it actually heals itself.
>> It was 1971 that I found
myself not feeling well.
Tired, exhausted, depressed.
I did go to the doctor.
He checked me over.
What happened was my
breast was very blue.
And big, I had a large
lump on my breast.
It was a massive cancer,
and it was quite bad
because they had to remove
the whole breast at that time.
And my weight was 135,
and went down to 108.
When they sent me home,
they told my husband
that there was nothing
more they could do for me.
I was so bad that
I couldn't walk.
I couldn't talk.
My friends came in to see me.
I didn't even recognize them.
I had a woman I worked for
for 15 years at the time.
She came and she said, Doris,
she's not going to make it.
She told my mother,
she's going to die.
So my sister told
my mother, we've
got to get ready for my
funeral arrangements.
My mother had the
doctor come in.
He came in, and he said,
I don't know why I'm here.
I can't help her anymore.
Her cancer is all over her body.
She is terminal cancer.
I can give her more drugs.
My mother said no.
And then we went into nutrition.
I couldn't eat.
I couldn't swallow.
All I did was drink juice.
And it was a juice glass,
and they put a straw in it,
and they kept saying,
Doris, you have to drink.
I started with apple,
carrot, and celery juice.
That was sort of the
main juice that I drank,
and then they switched
it to other types
of vegetable juices.
But the pain that
I went through,
you go through reactions
that is unbelievable.
I went through fever.
They checked my blood
pressure every day.
My husband would come
in say, Mrs. Sackman
said those are reactions.
And I said, what, though?
I'm not getting better.
I was bleeding here again.
I was broken again.
And I, I can't do it.
He says, you could.
And you go through
a lot of cleansing
that causes, you know,
when your body is so toxic,
and it has to clean some way,
and then with the cleaning,
you get pain, and not to
be afraid of the pain,
because it's a good sign.
And one of my friends
came in and said, Doris,
you mean the diet
does this to you?
Your eyes are so
bright and so white.
You're like a baby.
Got eyes like a baby.
And so I said, I don't know.
I just remember
my head was clear,
I knew my friends
were coming in.
It was a joy.
I would talk to my husband
and say, I feel so good,
I can't believe it.
I didn't think that I
would be in this condition
and feel so well.
And my doctor called me.
He says, I don't
believe you're alive.
And I said, yes,
doctor, I'm alive.
Please tell me, what type
of cancer did I have?
He says, you had
number four, and you
were a very, very sick girl.
It was impossible for
you to get better.
I couldn't have done it alone.
And the help from my husband,
my family, and especially
Ruth Sackman.
She was just wonderful to me.
She's a knowledgeable,
loving, and a kind person,
that she understood me, and
that's all that mattered.
As she always said, it's
not her that did it.
And I really respect
her very much.
She said, it was you, Doris.
I couldn't make
your salad for you.
You did it.
And that's the truth.
You have to be the one
that's willing from the heart
and believe that this
is going to work.
It's not an easy program,
but it's a program
that certainly does work.
>> Dr. Leventhal, I once read
something that you said about
your change in career from
oncology to functional
medicine.
If I could quote you,
"I feel I was entirely
at the wrong end
of the spectrum.
I was treating people at the
last stages of this disease.
Most cancers start
10, 20, or 30 years
before someone has symptoms
or gets a diagnosis.
Even when I was successful
in treating them
at the end of the process, I
wanted to be at the beginning."
Could you elaborate on that?
>> Sure.
The oncology community
as a clinical community
is not really concerned
with the causes of cancer.
And whenever I went to meetings
and attended plenary sessions
and lectures and went
to the prevention
parts of the meeting,
really the discussion
was about early detection.
And to me, early detection
is not prevention.
And that's, I
think, a big failing
of the clinical community
to not really look
at the possible
roads to prevention.
And I thought there was a
separation between the people
who were doing the research
on the cellular and molecular
level and the clinical
people who were dealing
with cancer as a disease.
>> Yeah, yeah.
I would like to ask you
about these five interviews
that we've just seen.
What was it that
impressed you the most?
>> They're all
interesting cases,
and they're all really
impressive people.
What struck me the most
was actually not the cancer
cases but the Lyme
disease case, because now
in functional medicine,
I'm dealing a lot
with the clinical
effects of toxins.
So his story really struck me
now as someone who figured out,
along with Ruth's help,
how to detox his body.
And I just find that extremely
fascinating and very helpful,
because there are a lot
of people walking around
with biotoxin illness,
and it's fairly
straightforward, I
think, to recover,
if you know what to do.
>> And what about cancer as
possibly a response to toxins?
>> I do believe in
detoxification as one aspect
of preventing cancer.
I think it's very important.
And the more I become aware
of environmental issues,
environmental problems,
problems with our food supply,
the more I realize
the importance
of detoxification as a natural
process, yes, but a process
that needs help,
because we're living
in a sea of unnatural chemicals.
>> Right.
And I think it was also very
impressive that almost all
of the patients who pursued
this program had reactions.
It was Lou Dina,
I think, who said,
well, I did the program
for three or four weeks,
and then I definitely
felt worse.
>> Right.
Yeah, that's a common
finding with any sort
of detoxification.
As you start to mobilize
various environmental toxins
and they start recirculating
in the bloodstream
and going out into the
blood and into the stool,
many patients do feel worse.
>> And then we consider that
healthy if we're not having
symptoms.
>> Right.
>> And then when we start
to detoxify, we get sick.
>> Right.
>> So it is a bit of
a paradox, isn't it?
>> Yes, it's hard to explain
to people that feeling worse,
having headaches or a fever
or some type of skin reaction
in the initial stages of a
detoxification is actually
a helpful sign that
things are moving.
There's such a strong
tendency in modern medicine
to try to treat every
symptom and to turn symptoms
into diseases.
You know, if somebody
is having reflux,
to put them on an acid
blocker and block the reflux.
If somebody is having
an allergic reaction
to an environmental
irritant, to stop the mucous.
And so many of our
modern medicines
are meant to block our own
body's response, probably
a normal response, to
an irritant or a toxin.
We try to squash any sort
of unpleasant symptom,
but it probably isn't the
best thing for the body
to do that all of the time.
>> And so this phrase or
this term the healing crisis,
that's something that I never
learned about in medical
school.
>> Oh, no.
Never heard it.
Detoxification wasn't
discussed at all.
>> But do you think that
it would make sense if you
explained it to your colleagues,
that a healing crisis is
actually a valuable asset
in the healing process?
>> I don't know.
There's so many sort of
fundamental philosophical
differences between someone who
is truly conventionally trained
and thinks conventionally
and someone like us,
where we actually think a little
bit more like a naturopath.
It's a whole re-education
that has to take place.
And in talking to
conventional physicians,
it's hard to move
them to that point
and to get them to the point to
recognize that detoxification
is a normal and desired
purging of some kind or normal
activation of the immune system.
I think that would
be very difficult.
>> Rita was actually one of
your patients, wasn't she?
>> Yes, still is.
>> She still is?
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Can you tell us a little
bit about your experience with
Rita?
>> Well, Rita became a one
of my teachers, actually.
She came to me, I think
it was several years
after she was diagnosed
with renal cell cancer.
She had multiple lung nodules
at the time of diagnosis.
She had x-rays demonstrating
the lung nodules.
She had a path report showing
the renal cell cancer.
And then she had some
diet and lifestyle changes
and had resolution of all
of her pulmonary nodules.
And when I saw her, she actually
had a normal chest x-ray
and was what we call in oncology
NED, no evidence of disease.
>> I once met Doris Sokosh
at one of Ruth's conferences,
and I went up to her
afterwards, and I said,
did this experience
change you in any way?
And she said, oh, yes.
And also I think it was
Michal who said it's really
a total transformation.
>> Yeah, when I was watching
Michal, I had that sense.
It jumped off of the
screen the strength
that she had to walk away from
the conventional treatment
and the certainty that
she could figure this out.
>> Something that Lou Dina said
in his interview is that he
basically pointed out the
aspects of the program,
and then he said, but you really
have to be your own doctor.
He says, it takes
a lot of resolve.
Do you find that to be
true in your patients who
do well as compared to the ones
who maybe don't do as well?
>> There are many patients
who really still have a very
paternalistic view of medicine
where the doctor knows better
and they just want to follow
the standard protocols,
whatever the doctor thinks.
And then there's the
other kind of patient
that wants to be involved
in their care, wants to act,
and in the extreme, wants
to actually find, help find
the right care for themselves,
and maybe put together
several different things
that they've come across.
>> Would you say it's a
difference between being
a passive patient and
being an active patient?
>> Absolutely.
And active patient
for me was a pleasure,
because I really felt like I was
going on a journey with them,
and I was going to
learn something, too.
And it was a different
thing each time.
And a passive patient is willing
to let things be done to them
and then holds the medical
system responsible completely
for the outcome.
So it's easier-- superficially
it might seem easier
to have a passive patient,
but actually it's harder,
because they will not take
any responsibility for outcome
at all.
It's all, the success or failure
is the success or failure
of your system, your
drugs, your office.
So that's a very
difficult situation
to be in as a physician.
I always enjoyed the
act patients more.
>> And do you think fear
plays a big role in it?
>> Oh, fear is a
tremendous-- you know,
leaving conventional treatment
for something that is not
in the textbooks, none of their
friends are doing or have heard
of.
That's very difficult
for a patient to do.
It takes a lot of courage and
a lot of spirit and strength
to do that.
>> One of the ideas that was a
core concept in Ruth's system
is that you don't
just treat the tumor.
You don't just try
to kill the tumor,
but you really look
at the bodily balance,
the bodily condition
that created the tumor.
>> Mm-hmm.
That is something
that is not addressed
in conventional oncology at all.
And yet, for example,
we know that people
who have had Hodgkin's
lymphoma have
a higher incidence of developing
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
Or patients who
sometimes have one type
of lymphoproliferative disease
like a low-grade lymphoma
can then be diagnosed with
a high-grade lymphoma.
So clearly there is
something systemic.
Patients who have
had one breast cancer
are at increased risk
for a second cancer.
Everybody knows
this, and yet there's
no real thought or system for
dealing with risk reduction
in any sort of real way.
And I think that in that
sense, Ruth was very--
Ruth's system and many of the
integrative medical systems
that are out there
really do have it right,
because it's really
all about root cause.
>> Do you see a movement in
the medical establishment that
things might be
changing, points of view,
the thinking is changing,
perhaps broadening a little
bit?
>> There are some small changes.
I see that many
physicians, I think,
are becoming wary of the
pharmaceutical industry
and its agenda and beginning to
realize how that has dictated
their agenda and
dominated their treatments
and diagnoses over the years.
You can influence
physicians one at a time
with very extraordinary
cases, but you also
have to work from the top down.
You have to have textbooks,
you have to have studies,
you have to get into
medical schools,
and you have to get
before Congress,
because we have to
change the way that we
do medicine in the country.
We simply can't even afford
to do it the way that we've
been doing it.
>> It is important to point
out that to heal oneself from
cancer is a difficult task,
and it requires much courage,
determination, and
practical knowledge.
One's chances of
success are greater
with the help and guidance of
an experienced practitioner
and with strong support
from family and friends.
The patient's
condition and progress
must be carefully
evaluated and monitored.
We encourage
doctors and patients
to research the work that
has been done in this area.
The nutritional restorative
treatment of cancer is not
a one-size-fits-all treatment.
Each patient is a
unique individual,
and the treatment must be
tailored to individual needs.
>> It's so interesting how the
body responds, and amazing,
actually.
We don't have enough faith in
the body's ability to heal.
And so what happens when
you give the body all
of this good food and you
correct whatever is broken
down and not functioning well?
The body automatically
goes into play
and does whatever it has to do
to make the correction, which
human beings couldn't
do mechanically
as they would like to.
The body takes over, and it
is powerful in its healing
capacity.
All the research is aimed
at killing cancer cells,
reducing tumor size, whether
it's with surgery, radiation,
or chemotherapy.
And to date, it doesn't
cure, it buys time.
I would like the
medical community,
after surgery, when
surgery is appropriate,
to start the repair program
instead of radiation
and chemotherapy immediately,
and do that damage, which
is hard to overcome.
Instead to take the body
at the safest point,
the healthiest point,
and start the repair.
It's not just fruits and
vegetables that are raw.
We need protein,
we need starch, we
need every element
that is necessary
for health and to build cells.
Or it's actually to build
cells which provides the help.
A healthy body with a
healthy immune system
will automatically reject
any foreign material
that the body has accumulated
I don't want to give
a large body of people
a direction of
changing a lifestyle,
because I believe coming
from a bad lifestyle,
they need careful help.
They need some guidance
to make that change.
It has to be made slowly.
I'd like to see the
medical community change
its method of treating
cancer so that every patient
or any patient can go
to their local hospital,
nearby, near home, and get
the kind of treatment that
is required in order
to recover, instead
of having to search the
internet, go to far-off places
to get help.
I'd like to see that in every
institution in the country.
[MUSIC PLAYING]